Docs for checkpointing in adjoint simulations (#4094)
firedrakeproject/firedrake: docs/source/checkpointing.rst

stored in memory. For some time-dependent simulations, this can lead to a
large memory footprint. To alleviate this, checkpointing strategies can be used
to store intermediate results either in memory or on disk.

Checkpointing for time-dependent adjoint simulations in Firedrake employs
schedules, which determine how forward data is stored. These schedules are
implemented in the `checkpoint_schedules package
<https://www.firedrakeproject.org/checkpoint_schedules/>`_.

To store every time step of the forward data required for adjoint-based gradient
computation **in memory**, use the following code:

.. code-block:: python3

    from firedrake import *
    from firedrake.adjoint import *
    from checkpoint_schedules import SingleMemoryStorageSchedule

    continue_annotation()
    tape = get_working_tape()
    tape.enable_checkpointing(SingleMemoryStorageSchedule())

**For any checkpointing approach, it is essential to call the time loop as
follows when advancing the solver in time:**

.. code-block:: python3

    for step in tape.timestepper(range(total_steps)):
        # Advance the forward model
        # ...

> ``SingleMemoryStorageSchedule`` stores only the adjoint variable from the last adjoint
> time step, which corresponds to the zero forward time step due to the time-reversed nature
> of the adjoint solver

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``SingleMemoryStorageSchedule`` stores only the adjoint variables from the last adjoint
time step, which corresponds to the zero forward time step due to the time-reversed nature
of the adjoint solver.
```

To store every time step of the forward data required for adjoint-based gradient
computation **on disk**, use the following code:

.. code-block:: python3

    from firedrake import *
    from firedrake.adjoint import *
    from checkpoint_schedules import SingleDiskStorageSchedule

    continue_annotation()
    tape = get_working_tape()
    enable_disk_checkpointing()
    tape.enable_checkpointing(SingleDiskStorageSchedule())

For disk checkpointing, all mesh constructors must be wrapped using
:func:`~.checkpointing.checkpointable_mesh`. For example:

.. code-block:: python3
    
    mesh = UnitSquareMesh(10, 10)
    mesh = checkpointable_mesh(mesh)

> ``SingleDiskStorageSchedule`` stores only the adjoint variable from the last adjoint
> time step (equivalent to zero forward time step) in memory. This checkpointing strategy
> reduces memory usage at the cost of reading and writing data from disk.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``SingleDiskStorageSchedule`` stores only the adjoint variables from the last adjoint
time step (equivalent to the zero forward time step) in memory. This checkpointing strategy
reduces memory usage at the cost of reading and writing data from disk.
```

adjoint calculation on disk, while keeping only the last time step of the
gradient in memory. ``SingleDiskStorageSchedule`` reduces memory usage at
the cost of reading and writing data from disk.

The ``checkpoint_schedules`` package provides other checkpointing
strategies, such as Revolve, Mixed Schedule, and HRevolve. These methods
store only a limited set of time steps, reducing memory usage at the cost of
increased computational effort due to repeated forward calculations.

For example, to use the **Revolve** schedule:

.. code-block:: python3

    from firedrake import *
    from firedrake.adjoint import *
    from checkpoint_schedules import RevolveSchedule

    continue_annotation()
    tape = get_working_tape()
    tape.enable_checkpointing(RevolveSchedule(total_steps, steps_to_store))

    ...

    # Advance the forward model in time
    for step in tape.timestepper(range(total_steps)):
        # ...

Here, ``steps_to_store`` is the number of time steps stored in memory.

For more details on available checkpointing strategies, refer to the
`checkpoint_schedules package documentation
<https://www.firedrakeproject.org/checkpoint_schedules/>`_.

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

loaded using the same mode.

Using checkpointing in adjoint simulations
===============================================

When adjoint annotation is active, the result of every Firedrake operation is
stored in memory. For some time-dependent simulations, this can lead to a
large memory footprint. To alleviate this, checkpointing strategies can be used

> to store intermediate results either in memory or on disk.

Reviewer 2: This reads a bit odd. It seems to be saying "to stop excessive memory usage we can store intermediate results in memory". Probably better to say something like "we can use checkpointing strategies to store only some intermediate results in memory or on disk".

> large memory footprint. To alleviate this, checkpointing strategies can be used
> to store intermediate results either in memory or on disk.

Author: ```suggestion
large memory footprint. To alleviate this, we can use checkpointing strategies to store only some intermediate forward data in memory or on disk.
```

stored in memory. For some time-dependent simulations, this can lead to a
large memory footprint. To alleviate this, checkpointing strategies can be used
to store intermediate results either in memory or on disk.

Checkpointing for time-dependent adjoint simulations in Firedrake employs
schedules, which determine how forward data is stored. These schedules are
implemented in the `checkpoint_schedules package
<https://www.firedrakeproject.org/checkpoint_schedules/>`_.

To store every time step of the forward data required for adjoint-based gradient
computation **in memory**, use the following code:

.. code-block:: python3

    from firedrake import *
    from firedrake.adjoint import *
    from checkpoint_schedules import SingleMemoryStorageSchedule

    continue_annotation()
    tape = get_working_tape()
    tape.enable_checkpointing(SingleMemoryStorageSchedule())

**For any checkpointing approach, it is essential to call the time loop as
follows when advancing the solver in time:**

.. code-block:: python3

    for step in tape.timestepper(range(total_steps)):
        # Advance the forward model
        # ...

> `SingleMemoryStorageSchedule`` stores only the last time step of the gradient in memory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``SingleMemoryStorageSchedule`` stores only the last time step of the gradient in memory.
```

Reviewer: Let's be careful about how we describe what is stored. Maybe talk about which adjoint variables are retained.
